
With this letter I would like to apply for the 2020 Google AI Residency program. My AI journey started completely by chance about one and a half years ago, after winning a Google sponsored developer challenge. A few scholarships later, I discovered an entire new world out there, and so my interests shifted from the traditional physics research (I have a PhD degree in theoretical physics) to the field of deep learning, more specifically to the neural network architectures and optimization algorithms. For example, I was amazed to see how a change to a relatively simpler model architecture (the Transformer model), combined with an attention mechanism, provides significant improvements to translation problems with less training. Replacing the recurrent neural networks, previously considered the state-of-the-art, with self-attention resulted in a superior model that apparently generalizes well to other tasks.
Is it this kind of innovative, unconventional approaches that I would like to get involved in. I often go to sleep dreaming of the future: I foresee fleets of drones training together in a decentralized manner and communicating with each other in their own developed language, or powerful AI expert systems coming with their own solutions to real problems. We need to create the AI for a better and safer future that will benefit all of the people.
As such, I would like to use my physics technical background to benefit the neural networks research. As an example, one can use the Fermi-Dirac function (describing the distribution of fermionic systems in condensed matter physics) as an activation function for certain network layers, thus enabling a new (learnable or tunable) local parameter: a neural network temperature. There are also various mixing and screening techniques, devised especially to accelerate the convergence of ab-initio self-consistent calculations for physical systems, which may be adapted to deep neural networks. Conversely, one can use deep reinforcement learning inspired optimizations to design novel materials with prescribed properties. In fact, several projects that I am currently involved in concern the use of such principles to control the heat and charge currents and enhance the heat to charge conversion efficiency. Instead of proposing models and testing them (conventional trial-and-error), one lets the algorithm build its own optimized model.
I truly believe that Google is the perfect place to pursue such research. Besides having the infrastructure, there is the environment of openness and sharing new ideas. Being currently part of the academia, I know that the true “currency” here is solely peer-reviewed publications, and this somehow stopped resonating with me. I would like to work on real world projects, projects that excite me, and that are applicable to real life. Last but not least, there are the amazingly talented people that you want to be surrounded by.
I hope that you will find my research interests aligned to those of Google’s, and that you will consider me to be a good match for the AI Residency program.
Looking forward to a great journey ahead,


